The Project Gutenberg EBook of Hymns and Hymnwriters of Denmark, by 
Jens Christian Aaberg

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Hymns and Hymnwriters of Denmark

Author: Jens Christian Aaberg

Release Date: August 11, 2009 [EBook #29666]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HYMNS AND HYMNWRITERS OF DENMARK ***




Produced by Stephen Hutcheson and Ken Jentsch









                    Hymns and Hymnwriters of Denmark


                                   By
                              J. C. AABERG

                              Published by
                      The Committee on Publication
          of the Danish Evangelical Lutheran Church in America
                             Des Moines, Ia.
                                  1945

                             Copyright 1945
                 The Danish Ev. Luth. Church In America

                  Printed in Lutheran Publishing House
                              Blair, Nebr.




                                Foreword


This book deals with a subject which is new to most English readers. For
though Danish hymnody long ago became favorably known in Northern Europe,
no adequate presentation of the subject has appeared in English. Newer
American Lutheran hymnals contain a number of Danish hymns, some of which
have gained considerable popularity, but the subject as a whole has not
been presented.

A hymn is a child both of its author and of the time in which he lived. A
proper knowledge of the writer and the age that gave it birth will
enhance our understanding both of the hymn and of the spiritual movement
it represents. No other branches of literature furnish a more
illuminating index to the inner life of Christendom than the great lyrics
of the Church. Henry Ward Beecher said truly: "He who knows the way that
hymns flowed, knows where the blood of true piety ran, and can trace its
veins and arteries to its very heart."

Aside from whatever value they may have in themselves, the hymns
presented on the following pages therefore should convey an impression of
the main currents within the Danish church, and the men that helped to
create them.

The names of Kingo, Brorson and Grundtvig are known to many, but so far
no biographies of these men except of the sketchiest kind have appeared
in English. It is hoped that the fairly comprehensive presentation of
their life and work in the following pages may fill a timely need.

In selecting the hymns care has been taken to choose those that are most
characteristic of their authors, their times and the movements out of
which they were born. While the translator has sought to produce
faithfully the metre, poetry and sentiment of the originals, he has
attempted no slavishly literal reproduction. Many of the finest Danish
hymns are frankly lyrical, a fact which greatly increases the difficulty
of translation. But while the writer is conscious that his translations
at times fail to reproduce the full beauty of the originals, he still
hopes that they may convey a fair impression of these and constitute a
not unworthy contribution to American hymnody.

An examination of any standard American church hymnal will prove that
American church song has been greatly enriched by transplantations of
hymns from many lands and languages. If the following contribution from a
heretofore meagerly represented branch of hymnody adds even a little to
that enrichment, the writer will feel amply rewarded for the many hours
of concentrated labor he has spent upon it.

Most of the translations are by the writer himself. When translations by
others have been used, credit has been given to them except where only
parts of a hymn have been presented.

Minneapolis, Minnesota, September 21st, 1944.




                                  INDEX




  Chapter                                                            Page
  Table of Contents                                                     7
  I  Early Danish Hymnody                                               9
  II  Reformation Hymnody                                              11
  III  Kingo's Childhood and Youth                                     21
  IV  Kingo, the Hymnwriter                                            31
  V  Kingo's Psalmbook                                                 41
  VI  Kingo's Church Hymns                                             44
  VII  Kingo's Later Years                                             51
  VIII  Brorson's Childhood and Youth                                  59
  IX  Brorson, the Singer of Pietism                                   65
  X  Brorson's Swan Song                                               84
  XI  Grundtvig's Early Years                                          93
  XII  The Lonely Defender of the Bible                               103
  XIII  The Living Word                                               112
  XIV  Grundtvig, the Hymnwriter                                      121
  XV  Grundtvig's Hymns                                               128
  XVI  Grundtvig's Later Years                                        150
  XVII  Other Danish Hymnwriters                                      161




                                                             Chapter One
                          Early Danish Hymnody


Danish hymnody, like that of other Protestant countries, is largely a
child of the Reformation. The Northern peoples were from ancient times
lovers of song. Much of their early history is preserved in poetry, and
no one was more honored among them than the skjald who most skillfully
presented their thoughts and deeds in song. Nor was this love of poetry
lost with the transition from paganism to Christianity. The splendid folk
songs of the Middle Ages prove conclusively that both the love of poetry
and the skill in writing it survived into the new age. One can only
wonder what fine songs the stirring advent of Christianity might have
produced among a people so naturally gifted in poetry if the church had
encouraged rather than discouraged this native gift.

But the Church of Rome evinced little interest in the ancient ways of the
people among whom she took root. Her priests received their training in a
foreign tongue; her services were conducted in Latin; and the native
language and literature were neglected. Except for a few lawbooks, the
seven hundred years of Catholic supremacy in Denmark did not produce a
single book in the Danish language. The ordinances of the church,
furthermore, expressly forbade congregational singing at the church
services, holding that, since it was unlawful for the laity to preach, it
was also impermissible for them to sing in the sanctuary. It is thus
likely that a Danish hymn had never been sung, except on a few special
occasions in a Danish church before the triumph of the Reformation.

It is not likely, however, that this prohibition of hymn singing could be
effectively extended to the homes or occasional private gatherings. Hans
Thomisson, who compiled the most important of the early Danish hymnals,
thus includes five "old hymns" in his collection with the explanation
that he had done so to show "that even during the recent times of error
there were pious Christians who, by the grace of God, preserved the true
Gospel. And though these songs were not sung in the churches--which were
filled with songs in Latin that the people did not understand--they were
sung in the homes and before the doors".

Most of these earlier hymns no doubt were songs to the Virgin Mary or
legendary hymns, two types of songs which were then very common and
popular throughout the church. Of the few real hymns in use, some were
composed with alternating lines of Danish and Latin, indicating that they
may have been sung responsively. Among these hymns we find the oldest
known Danish Christmas hymn, which, in the beautiful recast of Grundtvig,
is still one of the most favored Christmas songs in Danish.


    Christmas with gladness sounds,
    Joy abounds
    When praising God, our Father,
    We gather.
    We were in bondage lying,
    But He hath heard our prayer.
    Our inmost need supplying,
    He sent the Savior here.
    Therefore with praises ringing,
    Our hearts for joy are singing:
      All Glory, praise and might
      Be God's for Christmas night.

    Right in a golden year,
    Came He here.
    Throughout a world confounded
    Resounded
    The tidings fraught with gladness
    For every tribe of man
    That He hath borne our sadness
    And brought us joy again,
    That He in death descended,
    Like sun when day is ended,
      And rose on Easter morn
      With life and joy reborn.

    He hath for every grief
    Brought relief.
    Each grateful heart His praises
    Now raises.
    With angels at the manger,
    We sing the Savior's birth,
    Who wrought release from danger
    And peace to man on earth,
    Who satisfies our yearning,
    And grief to joy is turning
      Till we with Him arise
      And dwell in Paradise.


The earliest Danish texts were translations from the Latin. Of these the
fine translations of the well known hymns, "Stabat Mater Dolorosa", and
"Dies Est Laetitia in Ortu Regali", are still used, the latter especially
in Grundtvig's beautiful recast "Joy is the Guest of Earth Today".

At a somewhat later period, but still well in advance of the Reformation,
the first original Danish hymns must have appeared. Foremost among these,
we may mention the splendid hymns, "I Will Now Hymn His Praises Who All
My Sin Hath Borne", "On Mary, Virgin Undefiled, Did God Bestow His
Favor", and the beautiful advent hymn, "O Bride of Christ, Rejoice", all
hymns that breathe a truly Evangelical spirit and testify to a remarkable
skill in the use of a language then so sorely neglected.

Best known of all Pre-Reformation songs in Danish is "The Old Christian
Day Song"--the name under which it was printed by Hans Thomisson. Of the
three manuscript copies of this song, which are preserved in the library
of Upsala, Sweden, the oldest is commonly dated at "not later than 1450".
The song itself, however, is thought to be much older, dating probably
from the latter part of the 14th century. Its place of origin is
uncertain, with both Sweden and Denmark contending for the honor. The
fact that the text printed by Hans Thomisson is identical, except for
minor variations in dialect, with that of the oldest Swedish manuscript
proves, at least, that the same version was also current in Danish, and
that no conclusion as to its origin can now be drawn from the chance
preservation of its text in Sweden. The following translation is based on
Grundtvig's splendid revision of the song for the thousand years'
festival of the Danish church.[1]


    With gladness we hail the blessed day
    Now out of the sea ascending,
    Illuming the earth upon its way
    And cheer to all mortals lending.
    God grant that His children everywhere
    May prove that the night is ending.

    How blest was that wondrous midnight hour
    When Jesus was born of Mary!
    Then dawned in the East with mighty power
    The day that anew shall carry
    The light of God's grace to every soul
    That still with the Lord would tarry.

    Should every creature in song rejoice,
    And were every leaflet singing,
    They could not His grace and glory voice,
    Though earth with their praise were ringing,
    For henceforth now shines the Light of Life,
    Great joy to all mortals bringing.

    Like gold is the blush of morning bright,
    When day has from death arisen.
    Blest comfort too holds the peaceful night
    When skies in the sunset glisten.
    So sparkle the eyes of those whose hearts
    In peace for God's summons listen.

    Then journey we to our fatherland,
    Where summer reigns bright and vernal.
    Where ready for us God's mansions stand
    With thrones in their halls supernal.
    So happily there with friends of light
    We joy in the peace eternal.


In this imperishable song, Pre-Reformation hymnody reached its highest
excellence, an excellence that later hymnody seldom has surpassed. "The
Old Christian Day Song" shows, besides, that Northern hymnwriters even
"during the time of popery" had caught the true spirit of Evangelical
hymnody. Their songs were few, and they were often bandied about like
homeless waifs, but they embodied the purest Christian ideals of that day
and served in a measure to link the old church with the new.


----------

[1]Other translations:
   "O day full of grace, which we behold" by C. Doving in "Hymnal for
     Church and Home."
   "The dawn from on high is on our shore" by S. D. Rodholm in "World of
     Song".




                                                             Chapter Two
                           Reformation Hymnody


The Danish Reformation began quietly about 1520, and culminated
peacefully in the establishment of the Lutheran church as the church of
the realm in 1536. The movement was not, as in some other countries, the
work of a single outstanding reformer. It came rather as an almost
spontaneous uprising of the people under several independent leaders,
among whom men like Hans Tausen, Jorgen Sadolin, Claus Mortensen, Hans
Spandemager and others merely stand out as the most prominent. And it was
probably this very spontaneity which invested the movement with such an
irresistible force that within in a few years it was able to overthrow an
establishment that had exerted a powerful influence over the country for
more than seven centuries.

In this accomplishment Evangelical hymnody played a prominent part.
Though the Reformation gained little momentum before 1526, the Papists
began as early as 1527, to preach against "the sacrilegious custom of
roaring Danish ballads at the church service". As no collection of hymns
had then been published, the hymns thus used must have been circulated
privately, showing the eagerness of the people to adopt the new custom.
The leaders of the Reformation were quick to recognize the new interest
and make use of it in the furtherance of their cause. The first Danish
hymnal was published at Malmø in 1528 by Hans Mortensen. It contained ten
hymns and a splendid liturgy for the morning service. This small
collection proved so popular that it was soon enlarged by the addition of
thirty new hymns and appropriate liturgies for the various other
services, that were held on the Sabbath day. Independent collections were
almost simultaneously published by Hans Tausen, Arvid Petersen and
others. And, as these different collections all circulated throughout the
country, the result was confusing. At a meeting in Copenhagen of
Evangelical leaders from all parts of the country, it was decided to
revise the various collections and to combine them into one hymnal. This
first common hymnal for the Danish church appeared in 1531, and served as
the hymnal of the church till 1544, when it was revised and enlarged by
Hans Tausen. Tausen's hymnal was replaced in 1569 by _The Danish
Psalmbook_, compiled by Hans Thomisson, a pastor of the Church of Our
Lady at Copenhagen, and the ablest translator and hymnwriter of the
Reformation period. _Hans Thomisson's Hymnal_--as it was popularly
named--was beyond question the finest hymnal of the transition period. It
was exceptionally well printed, contained 268 hymns, set to their
appropriate tunes, and served through innumerable reprints as the hymnal
of the Danish church for more than 150 years.

Thus the Reformation, in less than fifty years, had produced an
acceptable hymnal and had established congregational singing as an
indispensable part of the church service. The great upheaval had failed,
nevertheless, to produce a single hymnwriter of outstanding merit. The
leaders in the movement were able men, striving earnestly to satisfy a
pressing need. But they were not poets. Their work consisted of passable
translations, selections from Pre-Reformation material and a few original
hymns by Claus Mortensen, Arvid Petersen, Hans Thomisson and others. It
represented an honest effort, but failed to attain greatness. People
loved their new hymns, however, and clung to them despite their halting
metres and crude style, even when newer and much finer songs were
available. But when these at last had gained acceptance, the old hymns
gradually disappeared, and very few of them are now included in the
Danish hymnal. The Reformation produced a worthy hymnal, but none of the
great hymnwriters whose splendid work later won Danish hymnody an
honorable place in the church.

Hans Chrestensen Sthen, the first notable hymnwriter of the Danish
church, was already on the scene, however, when Hans Thomisson's Hymnal
left the printers. He is thought to have been born at Roskilde about
1540; but neither the date nor the place of his birth is now known with
certainty. He is reported to have been orphaned at an early age, and
subsequently, to have been adopted and reared by the renowned Royal
Chamberlain, Christopher Walkendorf. After receiving an excellent
education, he became rector of a Latin school at Helsingør, the Elsinore
of Shakespeare's _Hamlet_, and later was appointed to a pastorate in the
same city. In this latter office he was singularly successful. Lysander,
one of his biographers, says of him that he was exceptionally well
educated, known as a fine orator and noted as a successful author and
translator. His hymns prove that he was also an earnest and warm-hearted
Christian. The peoples of Helsingør loved him dearly, and for many years,
after he had left their city, continued to "remember him with gifts of
love for his long and faithful service among them". In 1583, to the
sorrow of his congregation he had accepted a call to Malmø, a city on the
eastern shore of the Sound. But in this new field his earnest Evangelical
preaching, provoked the resentment of a number of his most influential
parishioners, who, motivated by a wish to blacken his name and secure his
removal, instigated a suit against him for having mismanaged an
inheritance left to his children by his first wife. The children
themselves appeared in his defence, however, and expressed their complete
satisfaction with his administration of their property; and the trumped
up charge was wholly disproved. But his enemies still wanted to have him
removed and, choosing a new method of attack, forwarded a petition to the
king in which they claimed that "Master Hans Chrestensen Sthen because of
weakness and old age was incompetent to discharge his duties as a
pastor", and asked for his removal to the parishes of Tygelse and
Klagstrup. Though the king is reported to have granted the petition,
other things seem to have intervened to prevent its execution, and the
ill-used pastor appears to have remained at Malmø until his death, the
date of which is unknown.

Sthen's fame as a poet and hymnwriter rests mainly on two thin volumes of
poetry. _A Small Handbook, Containing Diverse Prayers and Songs Together
with Some Rules for Life, Composed in Verse_, which appeared in 1578, and
_A Small Wander Book_, published in 1591. The books contain both a number
of translations and some original poems. In some of the latter Sthen
readopts the style of the old folk songs with their free metre, native
imagery and characteristic refrain. His most successful compositions in
this style are his fine morning and evening hymns, one of which is given
below.


    The gloomy night to morning yields,
    So brightly the day is breaking;
    The sun ascends over hills and fields,
    And birds are with song awaking.
      Lord, lend us Thy counsel and speed our days,
      The light of Thy grace surround us.

    Our grateful thanks to God ascend,
    Whose mercy guarded our slumber.
    May ever His peace our days attend
    And shield us from troubles somber.
      Lord, lend us Thy counsel and speed our days,
      The light of Thy grace surround us.

    Redeem us, Master, from death's strong hand,
    Thy grace from sin us deliver;
    Enlighten us till with Thine we stand,
    And make us Thy servants ever.
      Lord, lend us Thy counsel and speed our days,
      The light of Thy grace surround us.

    Then shall with praise we seek repose
    When day unto night hath yielded,
    And safe in Thine arms our eyelids close
    To rest by Thy mercy shielded.
      Lord, lend us Thy counsel and speed our days,
      The light of Thy grace surround us.


Sthen's hymns all breathe a meek and lowly spirit. They express in the
simplest words the faith, hope and fears of a humble, earnest Christian.
The following still beloved hymn thus presents a vivid picture of the
meek and prayerful spirit of its author.


    O Lord, my heart is turning
    To Thee with ceaseless yearning
    And praying for Thy grace.
    Thou art my sole reliance
    Against my foes' defiance;
    Be Thou my stay in every place.

    I offer a confession
    Of my severe transgression;
    In me is nothing good.
    But, Lord, Thou wilt not leave me
    And, like the world, deceive me;
    Thou hast redeemed me with Thy blood.

    Blest Lord of Life most holy,
    Thou wilt the sinner lowly
    Not leave in sin and death;
    Thine anger wilt not sever
    The child from Thee forever
    That pleads with Thee for life and breath.

    O Holy Spirit, guide me!
    With wisdom true provide me;
    Help me my cross to bear.
    Uphold me in my calling
    And, when the night is falling,
    Grant me Thy heavenly home to share.
